* A Distributed Proofreaders Canada Ebook *

This ebook is made available at no cost and with very few restrictions. These restrictions apply only if (1) you make a change in the ebook (other than alteration for different display devices), or (2) you are making commercial use of the ebook. If either of these conditions applies, please check with an FP administrator before proceeding.

This work is in the Canadian public domain, but may be under copyright in some countries. If you live outside Canada, check your country's copyright laws. If the book is under copyright in your country, do not download or redistribute this file.

Title: Think Blue, Count Two
Author: Smith, Cordwainer [Linebarger, Paul Myron Anthony] (1913-1966)
Date of first publication: February 1963
Edition used as base for this ebook: Galaxy Magazine, February 1963 [New York: Galaxy Publishing Corporation] [first edition]
Date first posted: 12 April 2017
Date last updated: April 18, 2017
Faded Page ebook#20170449

This ebook was produced by Al Haines

Publisher's Note: As part of the conversion of the book to its new digital format, we have made certain minor adjustments in its layout.

Think BLUE,
Count TWO

Space was deadly. Many who
dared it died. Others were
less fortunate—they lived!

by CORDWAINER SMITH

I

Before the great ships whispered between the stars by means of planoforming, people had to fly from star to star with immense sails—huge films assorted in space on long, rigid, cold-proof rigging. A small space-boat provided room for a sailor to handle the sails, check the course and watch the passengers who were sealed, like knots in immense threads, in their little adiabatic pods which trailed behind the ship. The passengers knew nothing, except for going to sleep on earth and waking up on a strange new world forty, fifty or two hundred years later.

巨大的飞船在星际间低语之前，人们只能使用通过巨大的太阳帆从一个星球飞到另一个星球，巨大的幕布通过长而坚韧、耐寒的锁具来维系。小型太空船提供房间让一名随手来掌帆，检查航向、留意密封的乘客，挂在船后的隔热分离舱里，就像海量线程中的结点。乘客什么都不知道，只是在地球时入睡，在四十、五十或者二百年后在一个陌生的新世界里醒来。

This was a primitive way to do it. But it worked.

这个方法很原始，但是有效

On such a ship Helen America had followed Mr. Gray-no-more. On such ships the Scanners retained their ancient authority over space. Two hundred planets and more were settled in this fashion, including Old North Australia, destined to be the treasure house of them all.

飞船海伦美利坚号跟随着 Gray-no-more 先生号，那艘船的扫描仪保留了他们在星际间的古老威严。二百多个星球按这种方式殖民，包括古老的北澳大利亚，注定是他们的宝库。

The Emigration Port was a series of low, square buildings—nothing like Earthport, which towers above the clouds like a frozen nuclear explosion.

移民港是一系列低矮的方形建筑——不像地面的港口如同冻结住的核弹蘑菇云一样耸立在云端之上。

Emigration Port is dour, drab, dreary and efficient. The walls are black-red like old blood merely because they are cheaper to heat that way. The rockets are ugly and simple; the rocket pits, as inglorious as machine shops. Earth has a few show places to tell visitors about. Emigration Port is not one of them. The people who work there get the privilege of real work and secure professional honors. The people who go there become unconscious very soon. What they remember about earth is a little room like a hospital room, a little bed, some music, some talk, the sleep and (perhaps) the cold.

移民港古朴、单调、沉闷、高效。黑红色的墙有点像陈旧的血液，这样这样加热起来能更便宜。火箭丑陋而简单；发射井像机械车间一样暗淡。地表只少量露出来，告诉访客们，移民港不属于他们。在那里工作的人享有特权可以做实际工作，并获得专业荣誉。去那的人很快就丧失知觉，他们对地面的记忆只有一个类似医院病房的小房间，有张床，有音乐，有人谈话，可以睡觉而且（可能）有点冷。

From Emigration Port they go to their pods, sealed in. The pods go to the rockets and these to the sailing ship. That's the old way of doing it.

他们从移民港进入分离舱，并密封。分离舱运进入火箭，并放到太阳帆飞船上。这是一种古老的方法。

The new way is better. All a person does now is visit a pleasant lounge, or play a game of cards, or eat a meal or two. All he needs is half the wealth of a planet, or a couple hundred years' seniority marked "excellent" without a single break.

新方法能好些，一个人全部要做的就是参观一间舒适的休息间，或者玩纸牌游戏，或者吃一两顿饭。这需要半个星球的财富，或者在几百年的工龄里一直标记为“杰出”，不能有间断。

The photonic sails were different. Everyone took chances.
太阳帆就不同了，人人都有机会。

A young man, bright of skin and hair, merry at heart, set out for a new world. An older man, his hair touched with gray, went with him. So, too, did thirty thousand others. And also, the most beautiful girl on earth.

一名年轻人，头发和皮肤明亮，内心充满喜悦，开始了一个新世界。一位老人，头发染成了灰色，与他同行。林林总总的其他三十万人也是如此。还有，最漂亮的女孩还在地球上。

Earth could have kept her, but the new worlds needed her.

她可以留在地球，但是新的世界需要她。

She had to go.

她得走。

She went by light-sail ship. And she had to cross space—space, where the danger always waits.

她也乘着太阳帆飞船走了。她不得不穿越空间，而危险一直在那里等着她。

Space sometimes commands strange tools to its uses—the screams of a beautiful child, the laminated brain of a long-dead mouse, the heartbroken weeping of a computer. Most space offers no respite, no relay, no rescue, no repair. All dangers must be anticipated; otherwise they become mortal. And the greatest of all hazards is the risk of man himself.

太空有时会使用一些奇怪的工具——漂亮孩子的尖叫，一只死掉很久的老鼠的堆叠大脑，令人心碎的计算机的哭泣声。大多数空间没有休息区，没有中继站，没有营救站，没有维修站。所有危险都是可预期的，否则就会死。最大的危险就是来自于人类自身的风险。

"She's beautiful," said the first technician.

“她真漂亮”，第一个技师说。

"She's just a child," said the second.

“她还只是个孩子”，第二个说。

"She won't look like much of a child when they're two hundred years out," said the first.

“两百年后，她不会再看起来还像个孩子了”，第一个说。

"But she is a child," said the second, smiling, "a beautiful doll with blue eyes, just going tiptoe into the beginnings of grown-up life." He sighed.

“但她还是个孩子”，第二个说，微笑着。”蓝眼睛的漂亮玩偶，刚踏着脚尖进入成年人的生活。”他叹气到。

"She'll be frozen," said the first.

“她会被冻结，”第一个说。

"Not all the time," said the second. "Sometimes they wake up. They have to wake up. The machines de-freeze them. You remember the crimes on the Old Twenty-two. Nice people, but the wrong combinations. And everything went wrong, dirtily, brutally wrong."

“不总是，”第二个说。“有时他们会醒来，他们需要醒来，机器再重新冻结他们。你记得老22号里的罪行。好人，但是错误的组合。所有事情都错了，肮脏、残忍地错了。”

They both remembered Old Twenty-two. The hell-ship had drifted between the stars for a long time before its beacon brought rescue. Rescue was much too late.

他们都想起了老22号。该死的飞船在星际间飘荡了很久，直到信标带来了救援，但救援来得太迟了。

The ship was in immaculate condition. The sails were set at a correct angle. The thousands of frozen sleepers, strung out behind the ship in their one-body adiabatic pods, would have been in excellent condition, but they had merely been left in open space too long and most of them had spoiled. The inside of the ship—there was the trouble. The sailor had failed or died. The reserve passengers had been awakened. They did not get on well with one another. Or else they got on too horribly well, in the wrong way. Out between the stars, encased only by a frail limited cabin, they had invented new crimes and committed them upon each other—crimes which a million years of earth's old wickedness had never brought to the surface of man before.

飞船状况良好，船帆还保持着正确的角度，数以千计被冻结的沉睡者，每人都放在单人隔热分离舱里，系在船尾。本来一切都良好，只是他们在外太空放了太久，大多数都开始变质了。在飞船中——这有一个麻烦，水手出了问题或者死了。剩余的乘客被唤醒，他们彼此相处得并不好。否则他们会以错误的方式悲惨地活下去。星际之外，只被极其有限的机舱包裹，他们创造了新的罪行——地球的上百万年历史中人类从未犯过的罪行。

The investigators of Old Twenty-two had become very sick, reconstructing the events that followed the awakening of the reserve crew. Two of them had asked for blanking and had obviously retired from service.
老22号的调查员病得很严重。他重新构建活动安排，唤醒后备人员。他们中的两人没有回应，显然已经被服务系统剔除。

The two technicians knew all about Old Twenty-two as they watched the fifteen-year-old woman sleeping on the table. Was she a woman? Was she a girl? What would happen to her if she did wake up on the flight?

两名技师知道关于老22号的全部故事，就像看着一个十五岁的女人在桌子上睡觉。她是女人么？还是女孩？如果她在飞行过程中醒来会发生什么？

She breathed delicately.

她的呼吸很优美。

The two technicians looked across her figure at one another and then the first one said:

两名技师彼此对视着她的身影，然后第一个说：

"We'd better call the psychological guard. It's a job for him."

“我们应该叫心理卫士，这是他的工作。”

"He can try," said the second.

“他可以试试，”第二个说。

The psychological guard, a man whose number-name ended in the digits Tiga-belas, came cheerfully into the room a half-hour later. He was a dreamy-looking old man, sharp and alert, probably in his fourth rejuvenation. He looked at the beautiful girl on the table and inhaled sharply,

心理卫士是一名名字以数字 13 结尾的男性，半个小时候他高兴地走进房间。他是一个梦想般的老人，敏锐而警觉，大概处于第四次回归期。他看着桌子上的漂亮女孩，深吸了一口气。

"What's this for—a ship?"

“这是来自——一艘飞船？”

"No," said the first technician, "it's a beauty contest."

“不是，”第一个技师说，“这是场选美比赛。”

"Don't be a fool," said the psychological guard. "You mean they are really sending that beautiful child into the Up-and-Out?"

“别犯蠢，”心理卫士说到。“你是说他们真的把这漂亮孩子发送到 Up-and-Out?”

"It's stock," said the second technician. "The people out on Wereld Schemering are running dreadfully ugly, and they flashed a sign to the Big Blink that they had to have better-looking people. The Instrumentality is doing right by them. All the people on this ship are handsome or beautiful."

“那是股票，”第二个技师说，“在 Wereld Schemering 的人都丑得要死，于是他们给 Big Blink 发了个信号，说他们必须要个好看的人。”

"If she's that precious, why don't they freeze her and put her in a pod? That way she would either get there or she would not. A face as pretty as that," said Tiga-belas, "could start trouble anywhere. Let alone a ship. What's her name-number?"

“如果她真那么珍贵，为什么不把她冻结了放在隔热分离舱里？这样她要么会到那，要么她不会。这脸蛋真好看，”13号说到，“在任何地方都会引起麻烦，更别说在一艘飞船里。她的名字号码是多少？”

"On the board there," said the first technician. "It's all on the board there. You'll want the others too. They're listed, too, and ready to go on the board."

“在甲板上，”第一个技师说。“甲板上的东西都在这，你也许还想看看其他的。他们都列在这，准备运到甲板上。”

"Veesey-koosey," read the psychological guard, saying the words aloud, "or five-six. That's a silly name, but it's rather cute." With one last look back at the sleeping girl, he bent to his work of reading the case histories of the people added to the reserve crew. Within ten lines, he saw why the girl was being kept ready for emergencies, instead of sleeping the whole trip through. She had a Daughter Potential of 999.999, meaning that any normal adult of either sex could and would accept her as a daughter after a few minutes of relationship. She had no skill in herself, no learning, no trained capacities. But she could re-motivate almost anyone older than herself, and she showed a probability of making that re-motivated person put up a gigantic fight for life. For her sake. And secondarily the adopter's.

“Veesey-koosey，”心理卫士大声念到，“或者叫 5-6，真是个傻名字，不过这就更可爱了。”最后他看了一眼沉睡中的女孩，投入到工作中，阅读了加入后备人员后的病例。读了不到十行，就看到了为什么这个女孩在整个旅行过程中进入急救状态而不是沉睡状态。她的女儿潜能为 999。这意味着经过几分钟的交往后，任何性别的正常成年人都愿意把她当作女儿。她没有自己的技能，没有学习过，没有经过训练的能力。但是她可以重新激发任何比她年长的人，她具有重新激发别人为生活进行巨大斗争的能力。为了她，其次是为了收养者。

That was all, but it was special enough to put her in the cabin. She had tested out into the literal truth of the ancient poetic scrap, "the fairest of the daughters of old, old earth."

就这些，但是已经足够特别到把她放进船舱里。她符合那些古代诗篇的字面含义，“古老地球的最美丽的女儿。”

When Tiga-belas finished taking his notes from the records, the working time was almost over. The technicians had not interrupted him. He turned around to look one last time at the lovely girl. She was gone. The second technician had left and the first was cleaning his hands.

当 13 号在他的笔记上做完记录，工作基本要结束了。技师们没有打断他。他转回身，最后看了一眼那个可爱的女孩。她被运走了。第二个技师已经离开，第一个正在洗手。

"You haven't frozen her?" cried Tiga-belas. "I'll have to fix her too, if the safeguard is to work."

“你没冻结她？”13号叫到。“我必须修复这问题，如果安保设施还工作。”

"Of course you do," said the first technician. "We've left you two minutes for it."

“你可以搞，”第一个技师说。“我们要离开两分钟。”

"You give me two minutes," said Tiga-belas, "to protect a trip of four hundred and fifty years!"

“你给我两分钟，”13号说，“可以保护450年的旅程！”

"Do you need more," said the technician, and it was not even a question, except in form.

“如果你需要更长时间，”技师说。从语气上，这是甚至不是个问句。

"Do I?" said Tiga-belas. He broke into a smile. "No, I don't. That girl will be safe long after I am dead."

“我么？”13号说到，他笑了。“不，我不需要。这个女孩在我死后很长时间也依然安全。”

"When do you die?" said the technician, socially.

“你什么时候死？”技师客套地问了一句。

"Seventy-three years, two months, four days," said Tiga-belas agreeably. "I'm a fourth-and-last."

“73年，2个月，4天，”13号欣然说到。“我是倒数第四个。”

"I thought so," said the technician. "You're smart. Nobody starts off that way. We all learn. I'm sure you'll take care of that girl."

“我想也是，”技师说。“你很聪明，没人会这么开始，我们都要学。我很确信你会照顾好那女孩。”

They left the laboratory together and ascended to the surface and the cool restful night of Earth.

他们一起离开实验室，升到地面，夜晚凉爽舒适。

II

Late the next day, Tiga-belas came in, very cheerful indeed. In his left hand he held a drama spool, full commercial size. In his right hand there was a black plastic cube with shimmering silver contact-points gleaning on its sides. The two technicians greeted him politely.

第二天晚些时候，13号来了，显得格外开心。他左手拿着戏剧磁带，完整的商业尺寸。右手是一个黑色塑料盒子，侧面闪烁着银色触点。两名技师礼貌的接见了他。

The psychological guard could not hide his excitement and his pleasure.

心理卫士无法掩饰他的兴奋和快乐。

"I've got that beautiful child taken care of. The way she is going to be fixed, she'll keep her Daughter Potential, but it's going to be a lot closer to one thousand point double zero than it was with all those nines. I've used a mouse-brain."

我有了一个漂亮的孩子要照顾。
我有个修正的方法。
她会保持她的女儿潜力，但是更接近千分之二而不是现在的 999
我会用一个老鼠大脑。

"If it's frozen," said the first technician, "we won't be able to put it in the computer. It will have to go forward with the emergency stores."

“如果被冻结，”第一个技师说，“我们不能把它放进电脑里，它得跟紧急商店一起前进。”

"This brain isn't frozen," said Tiga-belas indignantly. "It's been laminated. We stiffened it with celluprime and then we veneered it down, about seven thousand layers. Each one has plastic of at least two molecular thicknesses. This mouse can't spoil. As a matter of fact, this mouse is going to go on thinking forever. He won't think much, unless we put the voltage on him, but he'll think. And he can't spoil. This is ceramic plastic, and it would take a major weapon to break it."

“大脑不冻结，”13号显得很生气。“它是层压的。我们用主细胞强化了，然后把覆面揭下来，压了大概七千层。每层塑料都至少都至少有两个分子厚。这老鼠不会搞破坏。事实上，这只老鼠会永远思考下去。他不能思考太多，除非我们加电压，不然就只是刚能思考而已。它不能搞破坏。这是陶瓷塑料，破坏它需要一把正式点的武器。”

"The contacts...?" said the second technician.

“触点……？”第二个技师问。

"They don't go through," said Tigas-belas. "This mouse is tuned into that girl's personality, up to a thousand meters. You can put him anywhere in the ship. The case has been hardened. The contacts are just attached on the outside. They feed to nickel-steel counterpart contacts on the inside. I told you, this mouse is going to be thinking when the last human being on the last known planet is dead. And it's going to be thinking about that girl. Forever."

“他们不会过去，”13号说，“鼠脑会成为这女孩的人格，上千个单位。你可以把他放在飞船的任何地方。盒子已经加强过，触点只会露在外面。反馈会通过镍钢配件联系到里面。我跟你说了，老鼠会一直思考下去，直到最后一个星球的最后一个人类死掉，他依然会去思考这女孩。永远。”

"Forever is an awfully long time," said the first technician, with a shiver. "We only need a safety period of two thousand years. The girl herself would spoil in less than a thousand years, if anything did go wrong."

“永远可是个长得可怕的时间，”第一个技师说，哆嗦了一下。“我们只需要保证两千年内是安全的就可以了，如果不出什么差错，这女孩本身会在一千年内变质。”

"Never you mind," said Tiga-belas, "that girl is going to be guarded whether she is spoiled or not." He spoke to the cube. "You're going along with Veesey, fellow, and if she is an Old Twenty-two you'll turn the whole thing into a toddle-garden frolic complete with ice cream and hymns to the West Wind." Tiga-belas looked up at the other men and said, quite unnecessarily, "He can't hear me."

“不打紧，”13号说到，“不管这女孩变没变质，都会得到保护。”他对这盒子说。“你要去跟 Veesey 相处啦，伙计。如果她是 老22，你会把整个事情变成儿童乐园，带着冰淇淋和西风赞美诗。”13号抬头看着其他人，不必要的小声说，“他听不到我”

"Of course not," said the first technician, very dryly.

“当然不是，”第一个技师尴尬地说到。

They all looked at the cube. It was a beautiful piece of engineering. The psychological guard had reason to be proud of it.

他们都看着盒子。这是个美丽的工程零件。心理卫士有理由为之骄傲。

"Do you need the mouse any more?" said the first technician.

“你不再需要老鼠了么？”第一个技师问到。

"Yes," said Tiga-belas. "One-third of a millisecond at forty megadynes. I want him to get her whole life printed on his left cortical lobe. Particularly her screams. She screamed badly at ten months. Something she got in her mouth. She screamed at ten when she thought the air had stopped in her drop-shaft. It hadn't, or she wouldn't be here. They're in her record. I want the mouse to have those screams. And she had a pair of red shoes for her fourth birthday. Give me the full two minutes with her. I've printed the key on the complete series of Marcia and the Moon Men—that was the best box drama for teen-age girls that they ran last year. Veesey saw it. This time she'll see it again, but the mouse will be tied in. She won't have the chance of a snowball in hell of forgetting it."

“不了，”13号说，“三分之一毫秒 40兆，我想让他的整个一生都印在她作皮质叶上，特别是她的尖叫。她尖叫了 10 个月。而且嘴里有东西。尖叫到第十个月时她以为自己从竖井中停止掉落了，但其实没有，否则他也不会到这。他们还在她的记忆中，我希望老鼠能了解这些尖叫。她四岁生日时穿了一双红鞋子。给我和她整两分钟时间，我已经画出了整个系列的关键，关于玛西娅和月球人——他们去年表演的对于十二岁女孩来说最好的盒子剧。Veesey 看过。这次她会再看一次，但是老鼠会连上去。她就像地狱中的雪球一样没有机会在忘掉它。”

Said the first technician, "What was that?"

第一个技师说话了，“怎么着？”

"Huh?" said Tiga-belas.

“嗯？”13号说。

"What was that you just said, that, at the end?"

“就你刚才说的那些，最后怎么着？“

"Are you deaf?"

“你聋么？”

"No," said the technician huffily. "I just didn't understand what you meant."

“不聋，”技师面有愠色。“我是没理解你说的什么意思。”

"I said that she would not have the chance of a snowball in hell of forgetting it."

“我刚才说，她就像地狱中的雪球一样没有机会在忘掉它。”

"That's what I thought you said," replied the technician. "What is a snowball? What is hell? What sort of chances do they make?"

“这就是我问你的，”技师答到.“雪球什么意思？地狱是什么意思？他们创造了什么机会？”

The second technician interrupted eagerly. "I know," he explained. "Snowballs are ice formations on Neptune. Hell is a planet out near Khufu VII. I don't know how anybody would get them together."

第二个技师急切地插话到。“我知道，”他解释。“雪球说得是海王星的冰层，地狱说的是胡夫7号附近的一颗行星。我不知道为什么要将二者联系起来。”

Tiga-belas looked at them with the weary amazement of the very old. He did not feel like explaining, so he said gently:

13号用一种非常老式的、厌倦而惊诧的目光看着他们。他看起来不想多解释，只是缓缓地说：

"Let's leave the literature till another time. All I meant was, Veesey will be safe when she's cued into this mouse. The mouse will outlast her and everybody else, and no teen-age girl is going to forget Marcia and the Moon Men. Not when she saw every single episode twice over. This girl did."

“先打断一下，我的意思是。Veesey 把想法传给这老鼠后会非常安全。老鼠比她或任何其他人都长久，也没有哪个小女孩会忘掉玛西娅和月球人。她每一章都看两遍，她会记得的。”

"She's not going to render the other passengers ineffectual? That wouldn't help," said the first technician.

“她不会导致其他乘客无法抵达么？那没什么帮助，”第一个技师说到。

"Not a bit," said Tiga-belas.

“一点也不，”13号说。

"Give me those strengths again," said the first technician.

“再多解释解释，”第一个技师说。

"Mouse—one-third millisecond at forty megadynes."

“老鼠——三分之一毫秒 40兆。”

"They'll hear that way beyond the moon," said the technician. "You can't put that sort of stuff into people's heads without a permit. Do you want us to get a special permit from the Instrumentality?"

“他们会听到月亮背面的声音，”技师说。“未经许可你不能把这些东西放进别人脑海，你有使用这工具的特别许可么？”

"For one-third of a millisecond?"

“三分之一毫秒？”

The two men faced each other for a moment; then the technician began creasing his forehead, his mouth began to smile and they both laughed. The second technician did not understand it and Tiga-belas said to him:

两个人对视了一会，然后技师低下了头，他嘴上挂出了笑容，接着两个人都大笑起来。第二个技师没明白怎么回事，13号对他说：

"I'm putting the girl's whole lifetime into one-third of a millisecond at top power. It will drain over into the mouse-brain inside this cube. What is the normal human reaction within one-third millisecond?"

“我把这女孩的整个人生放进顶多三分之一毫秒里。将她倒流到盒子里的老鼠大脑里。正常人在三分之一毫秒里会有什么反应？”

"Fifteen milliseconds—" The second technician started to speak and stopped himself.

“15毫秒——”第二个技师欲言又止。

"That's right," said Tiga-belas. "People don't get anything at all in less than fifteen milliseconds. This mouse isn't only veneered and laminated; he's fast. The lamination is faster than his own synapses ever were. Bring on the girl."

“没错，”13号说。“少于15毫秒人不会感知到任何事情。这老鼠不光是覆面和压层，它很快。覆面比它自己的神经突触还快，带给那女孩。”

The first technician had already gone to get her.

第一个技师已经去找她了。

The second technician turned back for one more question. "Is the mouse dead?"

第二个技师转过身，又问了个问题。“老鼠是死的么？”

"No. Yes. Of course not. What do you mean? Who knows?" said Tiga-belas all in one breath.

“不，没死，当然没。你是什么意思？谁知道呢？”十三号一口气说到。

The younger man stared but the couch with the beautiful girl had already rolled into the room. Her skin had chilled down from pink to ivory and her respiration was no longer visible to the naked eye, but she was still beautiful. The deep freezing had not yet begun.

年轻人凝视着，但是女孩躺着的观察台已经收进房间里。她的皮肤已经从粉色冷却到象牙白，呼吸已经肉眼不可见，但她依然美丽。深度冷冻尚未开始。

The first technician began to whistle. "Mouse—forty megadynes, one-third of a millisecond. Girl, output maximum, same time. Girl input, two minutes, what volume?"

第一个技师吹起了口哨。“老鼠——40兆，三分之一毫秒。女孩，最大输出，同时。女孩输入，两分钟，填充什么内容？“

"Anything," said Tiga-belas. "Anything. Whatever you use for deep personality engraving."

“什么都行，”13号说，“什么都行。你用来深度个性化的，随便什么。“

"Set," said the technician.

“设定了，”技师说。

"Take the cube," said Tiga-belas.

“拿着盒子，”13号说。

The technician took it and fitted it into the coffin-like box near the girl's head.

技师拿起盒子，装到女孩头附近那棺材一样的箱子里。

"Good-bye, immortal mouse," said Tiga-belas, "think about the beautiful girl when I am dead and don't get too tired of Marcia and the Moon Men when you've seen it for a million years..."

“再见了，不朽的老鼠，”13号说，“想象一下，我死后这这美丽的女孩依然存在，希望在看了一百万年玛西娅和月球人和不要感到厌倦。”

"Record," said the second technician. He took it from Tiga-belas and put it into a standard drama-shower, but one with output cables heavier than any home had ever installed.

“记录，”第二个技师说。他从13号那记下来并放进一部标准的电视剧里。但拿起来的是一根任何人家里装过的都要更重的电缆。

"Do you have a code word?" said the first technician.

“你有代码词么？”第一个技师问。

"It's a little poem," said Tiga-belas. He reached in his pocket. "Don't read it aloud. If any of us misspoke a word, there is a chance she might hear it and it would heterodyne the relationship between her and the laminated mouse."

“有一首小诗，”13号说。他掏了掏口袋。“不要大声读。如果我们中有人念错词，她有可能听到它，这可能导致她跟老鼠脑子之间出岔子。”

The two looked at a scrap of paper. In clear, archaic writing there appeared the lines:

两人看了下纸片。两行清晰古朴的字迹：

Lady if a man
Tries to bother you, you can
            Think blue,
            Count two,
And look for a red shoe.

女士，如果一个人想打扰你，你可以
想想蓝色，数到二，然后寻找一只红鞋。

The technicians laughed warmly. "That'll do it," said the first technician.

技师们大笑起来。“会记下来的，”第一个技师说。

Tiga-belas gave them an embarrassed smile of thanks.

13号抱以尴尬的微笑表示感谢。

"Turn them both on," he said. "Good-by, girl," he murmured to himself. "Good-by, mouse. Maybe I'll see you in seventy-four years."

“把他们都打开，”他说。“再见了，女孩，”他自言自语到。“再见了，老鼠，也许 74 年后会再见到你。”

The room flashed with a kind of invisible light inside their heads.

房间闪烁了一下，就像他们脑海里有一束看不到的光。

In moon orbit a navigator wondered about his mother's red shoes.

在月球轨道上，一名导航员想找到他母亲的红鞋。

Two million people on earth started to count "one-two" and then wondered why they had done so.

地球上的二百万人开始数“1-2”，然后奇怪为什么要这么做。

A bright young parakeet, in an orbital ship, began reciting the whole verse and baffled the crew as to what the meaning might be.

一只鲜艳的小鹦鹉，在一艘轨道飞船里，开始背诗，让船员们感到困惑不已。

Apart from this, there were no side effects.

除此之外，没有产生别的副作用

The girl in the coffin arched her body with terrible strain. The electrodes had scorched the skin at her temples. The scars stood bright red against the chilled fresh skin of the girl.

棺材里的女孩用了极大的力气弓起了她的身体。电极灼伤了她太阳穴上的皮肤。伤疤在女孩冰冷鲜嫩的皮肤上泛起了红色。

The cube showed no sign from the dead-live live-dead mouse.

盒子没有那老鼠死掉或者活着的迹象。

While the second technician put ointment on Veesey's scars, Tiga-belas put on a headset and touched the terminals of the cube very gently without moving it from the snap-in position it held in the coffin-shaped box.

在第二个技师往 Veesey 的伤疤涂药膏的时候，13号戴上耳机，小心翼翼地触摸盒子末端而没有挪动它，让其保持在棺材型箱子的卡扣里。

He nodded, satisfied. He stepped back.

他点了点头，满意地退了回来。

"You're sure the girl got it?"

“你确认女孩传收到了？”

"We'll read it back before she goes to deep-freeze."

“我们会在她进入深度冷度前再读回来。”

"Marcia and the Moon Men, what?"

“玛西娅和月球人，这些么？”

"Can't miss it," said the first technician. "I'll let you know if there's anything missing. There won't be."

“肯定不会有差，”第一个技师说。“要有问题我会让你知道的。没事的。”

Tiga-belas took one last look at the lovely, lovely girl. Seventy-three years, two months, three days, he thought to himself. And she, beyond Earth rules, may be awarded a thousand years. And the mouse-brain has got a million years.

13号最后看了一眼那可爱而又可爱的女孩。73 年，2 个月，3 天，他琢磨到。而她，在地球法则之外，能活上千年。而这老鼠大脑能有上百年。

Veesey never knew any of them—neither the first technician, nor the second technician, nor Tiga-belas, the psychological guard.

Veesey 绝然不知道他们——无论是第一个技师、第二个技师、还是心理卫士13号。

To the day of her death, she knew that Marcia and the Moon Men had included the most wonderful blue lights, the hypnotic count of "one-two, one two" and the prettiest red shoes that any girl had seen on or off earth.

等她死的那天，他知道玛西娅和月球人，包括最美妙的蓝光，“1-2、1-2”的催眠计数，和地球或地球之外的任何女孩所见过的最漂亮的红鞋。

III

Three hundred and twenty-six years later she had to wake up.

326 年后，女孩醒了。

Her box had opened.

她的箱子打开了。

Her body ached in every muscle and nerve.

她身上的每一块肌肉、每一条神经都很疼。

The ship was screaming emergency and she had to get up.

飞船鸣响着紧急警报，她必须起身。

She wanted to sleep, to sleep, or to die.

她想睡觉，一直睡，或者睡到死。

The ship kept screaming.

飞船一直在鸣叫。

She had to get up.

她必须起身。

She lifted an arm to the edge of her coffin-bed. She had practiced getting in and out of the bed in the long training period, before they sent her underground to be hypnotized and frozen. She knew just what to reach for, just what to expect. She pulled herself over on her side. She opened her eyes.

她抬起一只手臂扶着棺材床的边缘。在把她送到地下进行催眠和冷冻前，有很长的训练期，她练习过上床下床。她知道怎么算达到目标，怎么算符合预期。她把自己拉到一侧。她睁开了眼睛。

The lights were yellow and strong. She closed her eyes again.

光线黄色而刺眼。她又把眼睛闭上了。

This time a voice sounded from somewhere near her. It seemed to be saying, "Take the straw in your mouth."

这时，一个声音在她附近想起，似乎在说，“把吸管放进嘴里。”

Veesey groaned.

Veesey 呻吟着。

The voice kept on saying things.

声音坚持在说那些话。

Something scratchy pressed against her mouth.

什么东西压在她嘴上，很痒。

She opened her eyes.

她睁开眼睛。

The outline of a human head had come between her and the light.

一个人的头部轮廓出现在她和灯之间。

She squinted, trying to see if it might be one more of the doctors. No, this was the ship.

她斜了下眼，试图看看有没有别的医生。不，这是在飞船上。

The face came into focus.

焦点逐渐对到脸上。

It was the face of a very handsome and very young man. His eyes looked into hers. She had never seen anyone who was both handsome and sympathetic, quite the way that he was. She tried to see him clearly, and found herself beginning to smile.

这是一张非常英俊非常年轻的脸，他在注视着她的眼睛。她从未见过像他这样既英俊又富有同情心的人。她试图看得更清楚一些，发现他露出笑容。

The drinking-tube thrust past her lips and teeth. Automatically she sucked at it. The fluid was something like soup, but it had a medicinal taste too.

喂食管穿过嘴唇和牙齿插了进去。她开始自动吮吸。流质有些像汤，但也有股药味。

The face had a voice. "Wake up," he said, "wake up. It doesn't do any good to hold back now. You need some exercise as soon as you can manage it."

这张脸开始说话了，“醒来，”他说，“醒来，现在退缩可没有好处。你需要尽快进行些锻炼。”

She let the tube slip from her mouth and gasped, "Who are you?"

她让管子从嘴里滑出去，喘着粗气，“你是谁？”

"Trece," he said, "and that's Talatashar over there. We've been up for two months, recueing the robots. We need your help."

“Trece，”他说，“那边是 Talatashar。我们已经在这呆了两个月了，修复机器人。我们需要你的帮助。”

"Help," she murmured, "my help?"

“帮助，”她喃喃自语，“我的帮助？”

Trece's face wrinkled and crinkled in a delightful grin. "Well, we sort of needed you. We really do need a third mind to watch the robots when we think we've fixed them. And besides, we're lonely. Talatashar and I aren't much company to each other. We looked over the list of reserve crew and we decided to wake you." He reached out a friendly hand to her.

Trece 的脸皱起了皱纹，露出令人愉快的笑容。“没错，我们需要你。在我们修理机器人的时候，需要有第三个人去观察机器人。此外，我们也很孤独。Talatashar 跟我不大能处得来。我们查看了后备人员清单，我们决定唤醒你。”他友好地伸出了一只手。

When she sat up she saw the other man, Talatashar. She immediately recoiled: she had never seen anyone so ugly. His hair was gray and cropped. Piggy little eyes peered out of eye-sockets which looked flooded with fat. His cheeks hung down in monstrous jowls on either side. On top of all that, his face was lop-sided. One side seemed wide-awake but the other was twisted in an endless spasm which looked like agony. She could not help putting her hand to her mouth. And it was with the back of her hand against her lips that she spoke.

然后她坐起来看着另外那个人，Talatashar。她猛的往后一躲：她从来没见过这么丑陋的人。灰色短发，贪心的小眼睛从眼窝里凝视着，看上去充满了脂肪。脸皮垂在畸形的下巴两侧。最要命的是，他的脸是斜歪的。一侧看起来很清醒，另一侧似乎因为充满痛苦的痉挛而扭曲。她不由自主地用手挡着嘴，说话的时候用手背贴着嘴唇。

"I thought—I thought everybody on this ship was supposed to be handsome."

“我以为——我以为这船上的每个人都应该挺帅的。”

One side of Talatashar's face smiled at her while the other half stayed with its expression of frozen hurt.

Talatashar 的一半脸对她笑笑，另一半则保持冻伤的表情。

"We were," his voice rumbled, and it was not of itself an unpleasant voice, "we all were. Some of us always get spoiled in the freezing. It will take you a while to get used to me." He laughed grimly. "It took me a while to get used to me. In two months, I've managed. Pleased to meet you. Maybe you'll be pleased to meet me, after a while. What do you think of that, eh, Trece?"

“我们曾经是，”他声音低沉，听起来不太高兴。“我们曾经都是。我们中有一些人在冷冻的时候腐坏了。你需要些时间来适应我。”他冷酷地笑了笑。“我花了一些时间来适应我自己。两个月前，我调整过来了。很高兴见到你，等过一阵子，也许你也能高兴见到我。你觉得呢？嗯？Trece？”

"What?" said Trece, who had watched them both with friendly worry.

“什么？” Trece 说，他正带着善意的担心看着他俩。

"The girl. So tactful. The direct diplomacy of the very young. Was I handsome, she said. No, say I. What is she, anyhow?"

“这女孩。很会说话。直接童言无忌地问我以前是不是很帅，我说，不帅。她怎么样呢？”

Trece turned to her. "Let me help you sit," he said.

Trece 转向她。“让我帮你坐起来，”他说。

She sat up on the edge of her box.

她起身坐在箱子边缘。

Wordlessly he passed the skin of fluid to her with its drinking tube, and she went back to sucking her broth. Her eyes peered up at the two men like the eyes of a small child. They were as innocent and troubled as the eyes of a kitten which has met worry for the first time.

他一言不发，把喂食管的软管递给她，她又继续吸吮起肉汤。她的孩子般的双眼端详着两个人。他们显得无辜而忧虑，就像第一个碰到麻烦的小猫。

"What are you?" said Trece.

“那你是什么来头？” Trece 说。

She took her lips away from the tube for a moment. "A girl," she said.

她管子上挪开嘴唇，顿了一下。“女的，”她说。

Half of Talatashar's face smiled a sophisticated smile. The other half moved a little with muscular drag, but expressed nothing. "We see that," said he, grimly.

Talatashar 的半张脸露出了复杂的笑容。另一半脸被肌肉拖动了一下，但还是没什么表情。“我们知道，”他冷酷地说。

"He means," said Trece conciliatorily, "what have you been trained for?"

“他的意思是，” Trece 安抚到，“你受过哪些训练？”

She took her mouth away again. "Nothing," said she.

她嘴唇又动了动。“没有，”她说。

The men laughed—both of them. First, Talatashar laughed with all the evil in the world in his voice. Then Trece laughed, and he was too young to laugh his own way. His laughter, too, was cruel. There was something masculine, mysterious, threatening and secret in it, as though he knew all about things which girls could find out only at the cost of pain and humiliation. He was as alien, for the moment, as man have always been from women: filled with secret motives and concealed desires, driven by bright sharp thoughts which women neither had nor wished to have. Perhaps more than his body had spoiled.

他们都笑了起来。首先 Talatashar 笑了起来，笑声里充满了世界上的各种邪恶。之后 Trece 也笑了起来，他还太年轻，笑声还没有自己的特点。他的笑声也同样很残酷。笑声里包含了雄性、神秘、威胁和秘密，好像他知道女孩面对的所有事情，都以痛苦和屈辱作为代价。他是个异类，如今，就好像男人总是来自于女人：充满了神秘的动机和隐蔽的欲望，驱动着明晃晃的锋利的想法，这些想法女人们既没有想过，也不希望拥有。似乎他身体之外的部分也腐坏了。

There was nothing in Veesey's own life to make her fear that laugh, but the instinctive reaction of a million years of womanhood behind her was to disregard the evil, go on the alert for more trouble and hope for the best at the moment. She knew, from books and tapes, all about sex. This laugh had nothing to do with babies or with love. There was contempt and power and cruelty in it—the cruelty of men who are cruel merely because they are men. For an instant she hated both of them, but she was not alarmed enough to set off the trigger of the protective devices which the psychological guard had built into her mind itself. Instead, she looked down the cabin, ten meters long and four meters wide.

Veesey 平生从未听见过，这笑声让她看到恐惧。但是女性们百万年来的本能反应让她无视了这种邪恶，对将要发生的更多麻烦保持警觉，而此刻抱着最好的打算。她从书籍和磁带里知道所有的性知识。这笑声不是关于小孩子的或者充满爱意的。笑声充满了轻蔑、力量和残酷。残酷的人之所以残酷，仅仅因为他们是男人。有那么一瞬间她憎恶这两个人，但她不够警觉，没能触发心理卫士内置在她脑海中的保护装置。

This was home now, perhaps forever. There were sleepers somewhere, but she did not see their boxes. All she had was this small space and the two men—Trece with his warm smile, his nice voice, his interesting gray-blue eyes; and Talatashar, with his ruined face. And their laughter. That wretchedly mysterious masculine laughter, hostile and laughing-at in its undertones.

这里就是家了，可能永远都是。还有一些沉睡者，但她没有看到他们的箱子。她只有很小的空间和两个男人—— Trece 带着温暖的笑容，声音动听，有着迷人的灰蓝色双眼。以及 Talatashar，脸已经毁坏。以及他们的笑声。那卑劣而难以琢磨的、充满雄性的笑声，充满了敌意和嘲笑。

"Life's life," she thought, "and I must live it. Here."

“一生一世，”她想，“我只能在这里活着。”

Talatashar, who had finished laughing, now spoke in a very different voice.

Talatashar 停止了嘲笑，现在用一种非常不同的声音说话。

"There will be time for the fun and games later. First, we have to get the work done. The photonic sails aren't picking up enough starlight to get us anywhere. The mainsail is ripped by a meteor. We can't repair it, not when it's twenty miles across. So we have to jury-rig the ship—that's the right old word."

“之后会有时间找乐子玩游戏的。首先，我们要把活干完。光帆无法获取足够的星光，我们哪也去不了。主帆被流星撕开了。我们没法修理，它足有 20 英里的跨度。所以我们需要使用船上的应急措施——用老话应该是这么说。

"How does it work?" asked Veesey sadly, not much interested in her own question. The aches and pains of the long freeze were beginning to bedevil her.

“怎么才能工作呢？” Veesey 悲伤地问到，她对问题本身没什么兴趣。长时间冰冻导致的疼痛开始困扰她了。

Talatashar said, "It's simple. The sails are coated. We were put into orbit by rockets. The pressure of light is bigger on one side than on the other. With some pressure on one side and virtually no pressure on the other, the ship has to go somewhere. Interstellar matter is very fine and does not give us enough drag to slow us down. The sails pull away from the brightest source of light at any time. For the first eighty years it was the sun. Then we began trying to get both the sun and some bright patches of light behind it. Now we have more light coming at us than we want, and we will be pulled away from destination if we do not point the blind side of the sails at the goal and the pushing sides at the next best source. The sailor died, for some reason we can't figure out. The ship's automatic mechanism woke us up and the navigation board explained the situation to us. Here we are. We have to fix the robots."

Talatashar 说，“很简单，帆上覆着膜。我们被火箭送入轨道。光的压力一侧比另一侧要大。由于一侧有压力而另一侧几乎没压力，飞船就可以飞向任何地方。太空中的物质非常稀薄，没有足够的阻力减慢咱们的速度。帆在任何时候都对着最亮的光源展开。最初的 80 年是对着太阳，然后会试着同时挡着太阳和和一些明亮的光纤。现在的入射光比咱们想要的更多，如果咱们不把阴面对准目标，让推面对着近乎最好的光源，那么咱们会偏离目的地。帆手已经死了，因为一些我们找不准的原因。飞船的自动化装置唤醒了我们，导航板解释了我们现在的处境。这就是咱们要做的，咱们要修复机器人。”

"But what's the matter with them? Why don't they do it themselves? Why did they have to wake up people? They're supposed to be so smart." She particularly wondered, why did they have to wake up me? But she suspected the answer—that the men had done it, not the robots—and she did not want to make them say it. She still remembered how their masculine laughter had turned ugly.

“但是他们怎么了呢？为什么他们不自己做呢？为什么他们要唤醒别人？他们应该够聪明。”她特别想知道的是，为什么他们要唤醒我？但是她怀疑他的解答——是这个人唤醒的，不是机器人——但是她不想让他们说出来。她还记得他们那雄性的笑声让他们变得多丑陋。

"The robots weren't programmed to tear up sails—only to fix them. We've got to condition them to accept the damage that we want to leave, and to go ahead with the new work which we are adding."

“机器人没有被安排如何撕开帆布——只有修复它们。我们需要适应它们，让它们接受这种咱们改变不了的破损，而继续进行咱们新加的工作。”

"Could I have something to eat?" asked Veesey.

“我能吃点东西么？” Veesey 问到。

"Let me get it!" cried Trece.

“我去搞！” Trece 尖叫着。

"Why not?" said Talatashar.

“当然！” Talatashar 说。

While she ate, they went over the proposed work in detail, the three of them talking it out calmly. Veesey felt more relaxed. She had the sensation that they were taking her in as a partner.

当她吃东西的时候，他们开始商量工作细节。他们三个冷静地讨论起来。Veesey 感觉轻松了点。她能感到他们正在把她当作伙伴。

By the time they completed their work schedules, they were sure it would take between thirty-five and forty-two normal days to get the sails stiffened and re-hung. The robots did the outside work, but the sails were seventy thousand miles long by twenty thousand miles wide.

当他们完成了工作安排后，他们确认这需要 35 到 42 正常天数来展开光帆重新挂起来。机器人在外面工作，但是光帆有 7 万英里长、2 万英里宽。

Forty-two days!

42 天！

The work was not forty-two days at all.

这工作根本不止 42 天。

It was one year and three days before they finished.

他们用了一年零三天完才完成。

The relationships in the cabin had not changed much. Talatashar left her alone except to make ugly remarks. Nothing he had found in the medicine cabinet had made him look any better, but some of the things drugged him so that he slept long and well.

机舱里的关系没有太大变化。Talatashar 让她一个人留下，避免产生丑陋的疤。在药品柜里他没找到任何能让他看起来好点的东西，但有点毒品可以让他睡得又熟又香。

Trece had long since become her sweetheart, but it was such an innocent romance that it might have been conducted on grass, under elms, at the edge of an Earth-side silky river.

Trece 早已成为她的情人，这个真实一场天真烂漫的恋情，应该发生在地球上的一条柔美的溪流旁，在榆树下、在草地上。

Once she had found them fighting and had exclaimed:

有一次她看到他们在打架，于是惊呼：

"Stop it! Stop it! You can't!"

“停下！停下！你们别打了！”

When they did stop hitting each other, she said wonderingly:

当他们停止殴打对方，她惊讶地说：

"I thought you couldn't. Those boxes. Those safeguards. Those things they put in with us."

“我想你们不能打架。那些箱子，那些安全卫士，那些东西会被安在我们身上。”

And Talatashar said, in a voice of infinite ugliness and finality, "That's what they thought. I threw those things out of the ship months ago. Don't want them around."

接着 Talatashar 用充满丑陋和不容置疑的声音说到，“他们是这么想的。我几个月前就把那些东西扔出飞船了。不想让它们在身边。”

The effect on Trece was dramatic, as bad as if he had walked into one of the Ancient Unselfing Grounds unaware. He stood utterly still, his eyes wide and his voice filled with fear when, at last, he did speak.

“”

"So—that's—why—we—fought!"

"You mean the boxes? They're gone, all right."

"But," gasped Trece, "each was protected by each one's box. We were all protected—from ourselves. God help us all!"

"What is God?" said Talatashar.

"Never mind. It's an old word. I heard it from a robot. But what are we going to do? What are you going to do?" said he accusingly to Talatashar.

"Me," said Talatashar, "I'm doing nothing. Nothing has happened." The working side of his face twisted in a hideous smile.

Veesey watched both of them.

She did not understand it, but she feared it, that unspecific danger.

Talatashar gave them his ugly, masculine laugh, but this time Trece did not join him. He stared open-mouthed at the other man.

Talatashar put on a show of courage and indifference. "Shift's up," he said, "and I'm turning in." Veesey nodded and tried to say good night but no words came. She was frightened and inquisitive. Of the two, feeling inquisitive was worse. There were thirty-odd thousand people all around her, but only these two were alive and present. They knew something which she did not know.

Talatashar made a brave show of it by bidding her, "Mix up something special for the big eating tomorrow. Mind you do it, girl."

He climbed into the wall.

When Veesey turned toward Trece, it was he who fell into her arms.

"I'm frightened," he said. "We can face anything in space, but we can't face us. I'm beginning to think that the sailor killed himself. His psychological guard broke down too. And now we're all alone with just us."

Veesey looked instinctively around the cabin. "It's all the same as before. Just the three of us, and this little room, and the Up-and-Out outside."

"Don't you see it, darling?" He grabbed her by the shoulders. "The little boxes protected us from ourselves. And now there aren't any. We are helpless. There isn't anything here to protect us from us. What hurts man like man? What kills people like people? What danger to us could be more terrible than ourselves?"

She tried to pull away: "It's not that bad."

Without answering he pulled her to him. He began tearing at her clothes. The jacket and shorts, like his own, were omni-textile and fitted tight. She fought him off but she was not the least bit frightened. She was sorry for him, and at this moment the only thing that worried her was that Talatashar might wake up and try to help her. That would be too much.

Trece was not hard to stop.

She got him to sit down and they drifted into the big chair together.

His face was as tear-stained as her own.

That night, they did not make love.

In whispers, in gasps, he told her the story of Old Twenty-two. He told her that people poured out among the stars and that the ancient things inside people woke up, so that the deeps of their minds were more terrible that the blackest depth of space. Space never committed crimes. It just killed. Nature could transmit death, but only man could carry crime from world to world. Without the boxes, they looked into the bottomless depths of their own unknown selves.

She did not really understand, but she tried as well as she possibly could.

He went to sleep—it was long after his shift should have ended—murmuring over and over again:

"Veesey, Veesey, protect me from me! What can I do now, now, now, so that I won't do something terrible later on? What can I do? Now I'm afraid of me, Veesey, and afraid of Old Twenty-two. Veesey, Veesey, you've got to save me from me. What can I do now, now, now...?"

She had no answer and after he slept, she slept. The yellow lights burned brightly on them both. The robot-board, reading that no human being was in the "on" position, assumed complete control of the ship and sails.

Talatashar woke them in the morning.

No one that day, nor any of the succeeding days, said anything about the boxes. There was nothing to say.

But the two men watched each other like unrelated beasts and Veesey herself began watching them in turn. Something wrong and vital had come into the room, some exuberance of life which she had never known existed. It did not smell; she could not see it; she could not reach it with her fingers. It was something real, nevertheless. Perhaps it was what people once called danger.

She tried to be particularly friendly to both the men. It made the feeling diminish within her. But Trece became surly and jealous and Talatashar smiled his untruthful lopsided smile.

IV
Danger came to them by surprise.

Talatashar's hands were on her, pulling her out of her own sleeping-box.

She tried to fight but he was as remorseless as an engine.

He pulled her free, turned her around and let her float in the air. She would not touch the floor for a minute or two, and he obviously counted on getting control of her again. As she twisted in the air, wondering what had happened, she saw Trece's eyes rolling as they followed her movement. Only a fraction of a second later did she realize that she saw Trece too. He was tied up with emergency wire, and the wire which bound him was tied to one of the stanchions in the wall. He was more helpless than she.

A cold deep fear came upon her.

"Is this a crime?" she whispered to the empty air. "Is this what crime is, what you are doing to me?"

Talatashar did not answer her, but his hands took a firm terrible grip on her shoulders. He turned her around. She slapped at him. He slapped her back, hitting so hard that her jaw felt like a wound.

She had hurt herself accidentally a few times; the doctor-robots had always hurried to her aid. But no other human being had ever hurt her. Hurting people—why, that wasn't done, except for the games of men! It wasn't done. It couldn't happen. It did.

All in a rush she remembered what Trece had told her about Old Twenty-two, and about what happened to people when they lost their own outsides in space and began making up evil from the people-insides which, after a million and more years of becoming human, still followed them everywhere—even into space itself.

This was crime come back to man.

She managed to say it to Talatashar, "You are going to commit crimes? On this ship? With me?"

His expression was hard to read, with half of his face frozen in a perpetual rictus of unfulfilled laughter. They were facing each other now. Her face was feverish from the pain of his slap, but the good side of his face showed no corresponding imprint of pain from having been struck by her. It showed nothing but strength, alertness and a kind of attunement which was utterly and unimaginably wrong.

At last he answered her, and it was as if he wandered among the wonders of his own soul.

"I'm going to do what I please. What I please. Do you understand?"

"Why don't you just ask us?" she managed to say. "Trece and I will do anything you want. We're all alone in this little ship, millions of miles from nowhere. Why shouldn't we do what you want? Let him go. And talk to me. We'll do what you want. Anything. You have rights too."

His laugh was close to a crazy scream.

He put his face close to her and hissed at her so sharply that droplets of his spittle sprayed against her cheek and ear.

"I don't want rights!" he shouted at her. "I don't want what's mine. I don't want to do right. Do you think I haven't heard the two of you, night after night, making soft loving sounds when the cabin has gone dark. Why do you think I threw the cubes out of the ship? Why do you think I needed power?"

"I don't know," she said, sadly and meekly. She had not given up hope. As long as he was talking he might talk himself out and become reasonable again. She had heard of robots blowing their circuits, so that they had to be hunted down by other robots. But she had never thought that it might happen to people too.

Talatashar groaned. The history of man was in his groan—the anger at life, which promises so much and gives so little, and despair about time, which tricks man while it shapes him. He sat back on the air and let himself drift toward the floor of the cabin, where the magnetic carpeting drew the silky iron filaments in their clothing.

"You're thinking he'll get over this, aren't you?" said he, speaking of himself.

She nodded.

"You're thinking he'll get reasonable and let both of us alone, aren't you?"

She nodded again.

"You're thinking—Talatashar, he'll get well when we arrive at Wereld Schemering, and the doctors will fix his face, and then we'll all be happy again. That's what you're thinking, isn't it?"

She still nodded. Behind her she heard Trece give a loud groan against his gag, but she did not dare take her eyes off Talatashar and his spoiled, horrible face.

"Well, it won't be that way, Veesey," he said. The finality in his voice was almost calm.

"Veesey, you're not going to get there. I'm going to do what I have to do. I'm going to do things to you that no one ever did in space before, and then I'm going to throw your body out the disposal door. But I'll let Trece watch it all before I kill him too. And then, do you know what I'll do?"

Some strange emotion—it was probably fear—began tightening the muscles in her throat. Her mouth had become dry. She barely managed to croak, "No, I don't know what you'll do then..."

Talatashar looked as though he were staring inward.

"I don't either," said he, "except that it's not something I want to do. I don't want to do it at all. It's cruel and messy and when I get through I won't have you and him to talk to. But this is something I have to do. It's justice, in a strange way. You've got to die because you're bad. And I'm bad too; but if you die, I won't be so bad."

He looked up at her brightly, almost as though he were normal. "Do you know what I'm talking about? Do you understand any of it?"

"No. No. No." Veesey stammered, but she could not help it.

Talatashar stared not at her but at the invisible face of his crime-to-come and said, almost cheerfully:

"You might as well understand. It's you who will die for it, and then him. Long ago you did me a wrong, a dirty, intolerable wrong. It wasn't the you who's sitting here. You're not big enough or smart enough to do anything as awful as the things that were done to me. It wasn't this you who did it, it was the real, true you instead. And now you are going to be cut and burned and choked and brought back with medicines and cut and choked and hurt again, as long as your body can stand it. And when your body stops, I'm going to put on an emergency suit and shove your dead body out into space with him. He can go out alive, for all I care. Without a suit, he'll last two gasps. And then part of my justice will be done. That's what people have called crime. It's just justice, private justice that comes out of the deep insides of man. Do you understand, Veesey?"

She nodded. She shook her head. She nodded again. She didn't know how to respond.

"And then there are more things which I'll have to do," he went on, with a sort of purr. "Do you know what there is outside this ship, waiting for my crime?"

She shook her head, and so he answered himself.

"There are thirty thousand people following in their pods behind this ship. I'll pull them in by two and two and I will get young girls. The others I'll throw loose in space. And with the girls I'll find out what it is—what it is I've always had to do, and never knew. Never knew, Veesey, till I found myself out in space with you."

His voice almost went dreamy as he lost himself in his own thoughts. The twisted side of his face showed its endless laugh, but the mobile side looked thoughtful and melancholy, so that she felt there was something inside him which might be understood, if only she had the quickness and the imagination to think of it.

Her throat still dry, she managed to half-whisper at him:

"Do you hate me? Why do you want to hurt me? Do you hate girls?"

"I don't hate girls," he blazed, "I hate me. Out here in space I found it out. You're not a person. Girls aren't people. They are soft and pretty and cute and cuddly and warm, but they have no feelings. I was handsome before my face spoiled, but that didn't matter. I always knew that girls weren't people. They're something like robots. They have all the power in the world and none of the worry. Men have to obey, men have to beg, men have to suffer, because they are built to suffer and to be sorry and to obey. All a girl has to do is to smile her pretty smile or to cross her pretty legs, and the man gives up everything he has ever wanted and fought for, just to be her slave. And then the girl—" and at this point he got to screaming again, in a high shrill shout—"and then the girl gets to be a woman and she has children, more girls to pester men, more men to be the victims of girls, more cruelty and more slaves. You're so cruel to me, Veesey! You're so cruel that you don't even know you're cruel. If you'd known how I wanted you, you'd have suffered like a person. But you didn't suffer. You're a girl. Well, you're going to find out now. You will suffer and then you will die. But you won't die until you know how men feel about women."

"Tala," she said, using the nickname they had so rarely used to him, "Tala, that's not so. I never meant you to suffer."

"Of course you didn't," he snapped. "Girls don't know what they do. That's what makes them girls. They're worse than snakes, worse than machines." He was mad, crazy-mad, in the outer deep of space. He stood up so suddenly that he shot through the air and had to catch himself on the ceiling.

A noise in the side of the cabin made them both turn for a moment. Trece was trying to break loose from his bonds. It did no good. Veesey flung herself toward Trece, but Talatashar caught her by the shoulder. He twisted her around. His eyes blazed at her out of his poor, misshapen face.

Veesey had sometimes wondered what death would be like. She thought:

This is it.

Her body still fought Talatashar, there in the spaceboat cabin. Trece groaned behind his shackles and his gag. She tried to scratch at Talatashar's eyes, but the thought of death made her seem far away. Far away, inside herself.

Inside herself, where other people could not reach, ever—no matter what happened.

Out of that deep nearby remoteness, words came into her head:

Lady if a man
Tries to bother you, you can
        Think blue,
        Count two,
And look for a red shoe...

Thinking blue was not hard. She just imagined the yellow cabin lights turning blue. Counting "one-two" was the simplest thing in the world. And even with Talatashar straining to catch her free hand, she managed to remember the beautiful, beautiful red shoes which she had seen in Marcia and the Moon Men.

The lights dimmed momentarily and a huge voice roared at them from the control board.

"Emergency, top emergency! People! People out of repair!"

Talatashar was so astonished that he let her go.

The board whined at them like a siren. It sounded as though the computer had become flooded with weeping.

In an utterly different voice from his impassioned talkative rage, Talatashar looked directly at her and asked, very soberly, "Your cube. Didn't I get your cube too?"

There was a knocking on the wall. A knocking from the millions of miles of emptiness outside. A knocking out of nowhere.

A person they had never seen before stepped into the ship, walking through the double wall as though it had been nothing more than a streamer of mist.

It was a man. A middle-aged man, sharp of face, strong in torso and limbs, clad in very old-style clothes. In his belt he had a whole collection of weapons, and in his hand a whip.

"You there," said the stranger to Talatashar, "untie that man."

He gestured with the whip-butt toward Trece, still bound and gagged.

Talatashar got over his surprise.

"You're a cube-ghost. You're not real!"

The whip hissed in the air and a long red welt appeared on Talatashar's wrist. The drops of blood began to float beside him in the air before he could speak again.

Veesey could say nothing; her mind and body seemed to be blanking out.

As she sank to the floor, she saw Talatashar shake himself, walk over to Trece and begin untying the knots.

When Talatashar got the gag out of Trece's mouth, Trece spoke—not to him, but to the stranger:

"Who are you?"

"I do not exist," said the stranger, "but I can kill you, any of you, if I wish. You had better do as I say. Listen carefully. You too," he added, turning half-way around and looking at Veesey, "you listen too, because it's you who called me."

All three listened. The fight was gone out of them. Trece rubbed his wrists and shook his hands to get the circulation going in them again.

The stranger turned, in courtly and elegant fashion, so that he spoke most directly to Talatashar.

"I derive from the young lady's cube. Did you notice the lights dim? Tiga-belas left a false cube in her freezebox but he hid me in the ship. When she thought the key notions at me, there was a fraction of a microvolt which called for more power at my terminals. I am made from the brain of some small animal, but I bear the personality and the strength of Tiga-belas. I shall last a billion years. When the current came on full power, I became operative as a distortion in your minds. I do not exist," said he, specifically addressing himself to Talatashar, "but if I needed to take out my imaginary pistol and to shoot you in the head with it, my control is so strong that your bone would comply with my command. The hole would appear in your head and your blood and your brains would pour out, just as much as blood is pouring from your hand just now. Look at your hand and believe me, if you wish."

Talatashar refused to look.

The stranger went on in a very deliberate tone. "No bullet would come from my pistol, no ray, no blast, nothing. Nothing at all. But your flesh would believe me, even if your thoughts did not. Your bone structure would believe me, whether you thought so or not. I am communicating to every separate single cell in your body, to everything which I feel to be alive. If I think bullet at you, your bone will pull aside for the imaginary wound. Your skin will part, your blood will pour out, your brains will splash. They will not do it by physical force but by communication from me. Communication direct, you fool. That may not be real violence, but it serves my purpose just as well. Now do you understand me? Look at your wrist."

Talatashar did not avert his eyes from the stranger. In an odd cold voice he said, "I believe you. I guess I am crazy. Are you going to kill me?"

"I don't know," said the stranger.

Trece said, "Please, are you a person or a machine?"

"I don't know," said the stranger to him too.

"What's your name?" asked Veesey. "Did you get a name when they made you and sent you with us?"

"My name," said the stranger, with a bow to her, "is Sh'san."

"Glad to meet you, Sh'san," said Trece, holding out his own hand.

They shook hands.

"I felt your hand," said Trece. He looked at the other two in amazement. "I felt his hand, I really did. What were you doing out in space all this time?"

The stranger smiled, "I have work to do, not talk to make."

"What do you want us to do," said Talatashar, "now that you've taken over?"

"I haven't taken over," said Sh'san, "and you will do what you have to do. Isn't that the nature of people?"

"But, please—" said Veesey.

The stranger had vanished and the three of them were alone in the spaceboat cabin again. Trece's gag and bindings had finally drifted down to the carpet but Tala's blood hung gently in the air beside him.

Very heavily, Talatashar spoke, "Well, we're through that. Would you say I was crazy?"

"Crazy?" said Veesey. "I don't know the word."

"Damaged in the thinking," explained Trece to her. Turning to Talatashar he began to speak seriously, "I think that—" He was interrupted by the control board. Little bells rang and a sign lighted up. They all saw it. Visitors expected, said the glowing sign.

The storage door opened and a beautiful woman came into the cabin with them. She looked at them as though she knew them all. Veesey and Trece were inquisitive and startled, but Talatashar turned white, dead white.

V
Veesey saw that the woman wore a dress of the style which had vanished a generation ago—a style now seen only in the story-boxes. There was no back to it. The lady had a bold cosmetic design fanning out from her spinal column. In front, the dress hung from the usual magnet tabs which had been inserted into the shallow fatty area of the chest, but in her case the tabs were above the clavicles, so that the dress rose high, with an air of old-fashioned prudishness. Magnet tabs were at the usual place just below the rib-cage, holding the half-skirt, which was very full, in a wide sweep of unpressed pleats. The lady wore a necklace and matching bracelet of off-world coral. The lady did not even look at Veesey. She went straight to Talatashar and spoke to him with peremptory love:

"Tal, be a good boy. You've been bad."

"Mama," gasped Talatashar. "Mama, you're dead!"

"Don't argue with me," she snapped. "Be a good boy. Take care of the little girl. Where is the little girl?" She looked around and saw Veesey. "That little girl," she added, "be a good boy to that little girl. If you don't, you will break your mother's heart, you will ruin your mother's life, you will break your mother's heart, just like your father did. Don't make me tell you twice."

She leaned over and kissed him on the forehead, and it seemed to Veesey that both sides of the man's face were equally twisted, for that moment.

She stood up, looked around, nodded politely at Trece and Veesey, and walked back into the storage room, closing the door after her.

Talatashar plunged after her, opening the door with a bang and shutting it with a slam. Trece called after him:

"Don't stay in there too long. You'll freeze."

Trece added, speaking to Veesey, "This is something your cube is doing. That Sh'san, he's the most powerful warden I ever saw. Your psychological guard must have been a genius. And you know what's the matter with him?" He nodded at the closed door. "He told me once, just in general. His own mother raised him. He was born in the asteroid belt and she didn't turn him in."

"You mean, his very own mother?" said Veesey.

"Yes, his genealogical mother," said Trece.

"How dirty!" said Veesey. "I never heard of anything like it."

Talatashar came back into the room and said nothing to either of them.

The mother did not reappear.

But Sh'san, the eidetic man imprinted in the cube, continued to assert his authority over all three of them.

Three days later Marcia herself appeared, talked to Veesey for half an hour about her adventures with the Moon Men, and then disappeared again. Marcia never pretended that she was real. She was too pretty to be real. A thick cascade of yellow hair crowned a well-formed head; dark eyebrows arched over vivid brown eyes, and an enchantingly mischievous smile pleased Veesey, Trece, and Talatashar. Marcia admitted that she was the imaginary heroine of a dramatic series from the story-boxes. Talatashar had calmed down completely after the apparition of Sh'san followed by that of his mother. He seemed anxious to get to the bottom of the phenomena. He tried to do it by asking Marcia.

She answered his questions willingly.

"What are you?" he demanded. The friendly smile on the good side of his face was more frightening than a scowl would have been.

"I'm a little girl, silly," said Marcia.

"But you're not real," he insisted.

"No," she admitted, "but are you?" She laughed a happy girlish laugh—the teen-ager tying up the bewildered adult in his own paradox.

"Look," he persisted, "you know what I mean. You're just something that Veesey saw in the story-boxes and you've come to give her imaginary red shoes."

"You can feel the shoes after I've left," said Marcia.

"That means the cube has made them out of something on this ship," said Talatashar, very triumphantly.

"Why not?" said Marcia. "I don't know about ships. I guess he does."

"But even if the shoes are real, you're not," said Talatashar. "Where do you go when you 'leave' us?"

"I don't know," said Marcia. "I came here to visit Veesey. When I go away I suppose that I will be where I was before I came."

"And where was that?"

"Nowhere," said Marcia, looking solid and real.

"Nowhere? So you admit you're nothing?"

"I will if you want me to," said Marcia, "but this conversation doesn't make much sense to me. Where were you before you were here?"

"Here? You mean in this boat? I was on earth," said Talatashar.

"Before you were in this universe, where were you?"

"I wasn't born, so I didn't exist."

"Well," said Marcia, "it's the same with me, only a little bit different. Before I existed I didn't exist. When I exist, I'm here. I'm an echo out of Veesey's personality and I'm helping her to remember that she is a pretty young girl. I feel as real as you feel. So there!"

Marcia went back to talking about her adventures with the Moon Men and Veesey was fascinated to hear all the things they had had to leave out of the story-box version. When Marcia was through, she shook hands with the two men, gave Veesey a little peck of a kiss on her left cheek and walked through the hull into the gnawing emptiness of space, marked only by the starless rhomboids of the sails which cut off part of the heavens from view.

Talatashar pounded his fist in his other, open hand. "Science has gone too far. They will kill us with their precautions."

Trece said, deadly calm: "And what might you have done?"

Talatashar fell into a gloomy silence.

And on the tenth day after the apparitions began, they ended. The power of the cube drew itself into a whole thunderbolt of decision. Apparently the cube and the ship's computers had somehow filled in each other's data.

The person who came in this time was a space captain, gray, wrinkled, erect, tanned by the radiation of a thousand worlds.

"You know who I am," he said.

"Yes, sir, a captain," said Veesey.

"I don't know you," said Talatashar, "and I'm not sure I believe in you."

"Has your hand healed?" asked the captain, grimly.

Talatashar fell silent.

The captain called them to attention. "Listen. You are not going to live long enough to get to the stars on your present course. I want Trece to set the macro-chronography for intervals of ninety-five years, and then I want to watch while he gives two of you at a time five years on watch. That will do to set the sails, check the tangling of the pod lines, and send out report beacons. This ship should have a sailor, but there is not enough equipment to turn one of you into a sailor, so we'll have to take a chance on the robot controls while all three of you sleep in your freezebeds. Your sailor died of a blood clot and the robots pushed him out of the cabin before they woke you—"

Trece winced. "I thought he had committed suicide."

"Not a bit," said the captain. "Now listen. You'll get through in about three sleeps if you obey orders. If you don't, you'll never get there."

"It doesn't matter about me," said Talatashar, "but this little girl has got to get to Wereld Schemering while she still has some life. One of your blasted apparitions told me to take care of her, but the idea is a good one, anyhow."

"Me too," said Trece. "I didn't realize that she was just a kid until I saw her talking to that other kid Marcia. Maybe I'll have a daughter like her some day."

The captain said nothing to these comments but gave them the full, happy smile of an old, wise man.

An hour later they were through with the check-up of the boat. The three were ready to go to their separate freezebeds. The captain was getting ready to make his farewell.

Talatashar spoke up, "Sir, I can't help asking it, but who are you?"

"A captain," said the captain promptly.

"You know what I mean," said Tala wearily.

The captain seemed to be looking inside himself. "I am a temporary, artificial personality created out of your minds by the personality which you call Sh'san. Sh'san is on the ship, but hidden from you, so that you will do him no harm. Sh'san was imprinted with the personality of a man, a real man, by the name of Tiga-belas. Sh'san was also imprinted with the personalities of five or six good space officers, just in case those skills might be needed. A small amount of static electricity keeps Sh'san on the alert, and when he is in the right position, he has a triggering mechanism which can call for more current from the ship's supply."

"But what is he? What are you?" Talatashar kept on, almost pleading. "I was about to commit a terrible crime and you ghosts came in and saved me. Are you imaginary? Are you real?"

"That's philosophy. I'm made by science. I wouldn't know," said the captain.

"Please," said Veesey, "could you tell us what it seems like to you? Not what it is. What it seems like."

The captain sagged, as though the discipline had gone out of him—as though he suddenly felt terribly old. "When I'm talking and doing things, I suppose that I feel about like any other space captain. If I stop to think about it, I find myself pretty upsetting. I know that I'm just an echo in your minds, combined with the experience and wisdom which has gone into the cube. So I guess that I do what real people do. I just don't think about it very much. I mind my business." He stiffened and straightened and was himself again. "My own business," he repeated.

"And Sh'san," said Trece, "how do you feel about him?"

A look of awe—almost a look of terror—came upon the captain's face. "He? Oh, him." The tone of wonder enriched his voice and made it echo in the small cabin of the spaceboat: "Sh'san. He is the thinker of all thinking, the 'to be' of being, the doer of doings. He is powerful beyond your strongest imagination. He makes me come living out of your living minds. In fact," said the captain with a final snarl, "he is a dead mouse-brain laminated with plastic and I have no idea at all of who I am. Good night to you all!"

The captain set his cap on his head and walked straight through the hull. Veesey ran to a viewport but there was nothing outside the ship. Nothing. Certainly no captain.

"What can we do," said Talatashar, "but obey?"

They obeyed. They climbed into their freezebeds. Talatashar attached the correct electrodes to Veesey and to Trece before he went to his bed and attached his own. They called to each other pleasantly as the lids came down.

They slept.

VI
At destination, the people of Wereld Schemering did the ingathering of pods, sails and ship themselves. They did not wake the sleepers till they had them all assured of safety on the ground.

They woke the three cabin mates together. Veesey, Trece, and Talatashar were so busy answering questions about the dead sailor, about the repaired sails and about their problems on the trip that they did not have time to talk to each other. Veesey saw that Talatashar seemed to be very handsome. The port doctors had done something to restore his face, so that he seemed a strangely dignified young-old man. At last Trece had a chance to talk to her.

"Good-by, kid," he said. "Go to school for a while here and then find yourself a good man. I'm sorry."

"Sorry for what?" she said, a terrible fear rising within her.

"For smooching around with you before that trouble came. You're just a kid. But you're a good kid." He ran his fingers through her hair, turned on his heel and was gone.

She stood, utterly forlorn, in the middle of the room. She wished that she could weep. What use had she been on the trip?

Talatashar had come up to her unnoticed.

He held out his hand. She took it.

"Give it time, child," said he.

Is it child again? she thought to herself. To him she said, politely, "Maybe we'll see each other again. This is a pretty small world."

His face lit up in an oddly agreeable smile. It made such a wonderful difference for the paralysis to be gone from one side. He did not look old at all, not really old.

His voice took on urgency. "Veesey, remember that I remember. I remember what almost happened. I remember what we thought we saw. Maybe we did see all those things. We won't see them on the ground. But I want you to remember this. You saved us all. Me too. And Trece, and the thirty thousand out behind."

"Me?" she said. "What did I do?"

"You tuned in help. You let Sh'san work. It all came through you. If you hadn't been honest and kind and friendly, if you hadn't been terribly intelligent, no cube could have worked. That wasn't any dead mouse working miracles on us. It was your mind and your own goodness that saved us. The cube just added the sound effects. I tell you, if you hadn't been along, two dead men would be sailing off into the Big Nothing with thirty thousand spoiling bodies trailing along behind. You saved us all. You may not know how you did it, but you did."

An official tapped him on the arm; Tala said, firmly but politely, to him: "Just a moment.

"That's it, I guess," he said to her.

A contrary spirit seized her; she had to speak, though she risked unhappiness by talking. "And what you said about girls ... then ... that time?"

"I remember it." His face twisted almost back to its old ugliness for a moment. "I remember it. But I was wrong. Wrong."

She looked at him and she thought in her own mind about the blue sky, about the two doors behind them, and about the red shoes in her luggage. Nothing miraculous happened. No Sh'san, no voices, no magic cubes.

Except that he turned around, came back to her and said, "Look. Let's make sure that we see each other next week. These people at the desk can tell us where we are going to be, so that we'll find each other. Let's pester them."

Together they went to the immigration desk.

[End of Think Blue, Count Two, by Cordwainer Smith]
